= Getting Started =

EFactory is a generic textual modeling language for EMF models. EFactory is an alternative to the standard tree-based EMF editors. EFactory is a generic EMF editor that provides all the advantages of a textual language. EFactory can be used to instantiate any EMF based model including Ecore itself. Models defined using EFactory integrate seamlessly into existing environments by being compatible on EMF resource level. For example, it is possible to reference an Ecore model that is defined using EFactory from an Ecore model that is defined using a graphical Ecore editor.

The following example demonstrates how to create an instance of a given [../images/Entity.png|Ecore model]  with EFactory:

 // import your metamodel
 use "http://com/googlecode/efactory/examples/entity"


 // create a new instance of "Model"
 Model{
          
 	// add a new instance of "SimpleType" to the feature "elements"
 	elements += SimpleType String
 	
 	// add a new instance of "Entity" to the feature "elements"
 	elements += Entity Person { 
 	
 		// add a property "name"          
 		properties += Property name { 
 			// set the type to String        
 			type = String
 		}
 		
 		// add a string property called "name" 
 		properties += Property relatives { 
 			// set the type to Person              
 			type = Person
 			// there are many relatives
 			many = true  
 		}
 	} 
 }   
 

==Example Project==
 
The easiest way to start is to create an EFactory generator project using the EFactory project wizard:

[../images/ProjectWizard.png|WizardScreenshot]

The wizard creates a project containing all necessary files for creating a new Xpand-based code generator in combination with EFactory.

[../images/ProjectStructure.png|ProjectFileStructure] 

== Language Features ==

The first step is to import the Ecore model which should be instantiated. An Ecore model is imported using its root EPackage URI:

 use "http://com.googlecode.efactory.examples.entity/model"

=== Creating new Instances ===

The keyword "new" begins the declaration of a new object, followed by the EClass for which a new instance should be created. New objects can have an optional identifier, which is required when the object should be referenced by other objects. Additional values of the new object's features can be declared afterwards within curly braces:

 'new' [ecore::EClass] (ID)? ('{'
 	(features+=Feature)* 
 )?
 	
 featureName = value // multiplicity 1

or

 featureName += value // multiplicity >1

The declaration of a feature's values differs depending on the feature type: reference, containment, or attribute.

=== Containments ===
 
A contained object is added by creating a new instance:
 
 feature = Entity child {...}

=== References ===

References are declared by the identifier of the referenced object:

 feature = ObjectIdentifier

=== Attribute  ===

Attribute values are set by the corresponding literal. Currently the following attribute types are supported:

'''Boolean:''' 
 value = (true | false)
'''String:'''
 value = "String"
'''Integer:'''
 value = -1
'''Double:'''
 value = -1.1
'''Enumerations:'''
 value = :LiteralName
'''Long:'''
 value = -1
'''BigDecimal:'''
 value = -1.1
'''BigInteger:'''
 value = -1
'''Short:'''
 value = -1


== Importing other Resources ==

It is possible to import existing resources into an EFactory file in order to reference elements inside. These resources must not necessarily be EFactory resources.

 use "http://com.googlecode.efactory.examples.entity/model"


 // import an EFactory file in which entities are defined
 import "Model.efactory"
 
 // import another non-EFactory file in which entities are defined
 import "Model.entity"

 Model{


 	elements += Entity Person { 
 	
 		properties += Property name { 
 			// String is defined in "Model.efactory"       
 			type = String
 		}
 		
 			properties += Property age { 
 			// Integer is defined in "Model.entity"       
 			type = Integer
 		}
 		
 	} 
 }   

Models that are defined in Efactory can also be loaded into other EMF-based editors, such as the standard generated tree editor. See the [../images/emfimport.png|screenshot] for an example. 

== Linking ==

In order to reference model entities in a textual language, the referenced entities must have a string-based identifier. However, an Ecore model  must not necessarily provide an attribute that represents an unique identifier. By default, in EFactory one can assign a name to every new element:

 Entity EntityName

In this case the identifier for the new instance of entity is "EntityName". References can be defined by using this identifier:

 type = EntityName
 
This is even possible when the underlying Ecore model does not define a unique identifier. However, if the Ecore model defines an attribute for an unique identifier, the value of this attribute can be set automatically by EFactory. By default, when a new instance is created, EFactory looks for a String attribute "name" and sets the name corresponding to the name given in the "new" statement:

 SimpleType String{
 	name = "String" 
 } 

is equivalent to:

 SimpleType String{}
 
If the name of the identifier attribute is not "name" but instead, for example, "id" one can provide a custom name mapping for the "id" feature at the beginning of an EFactory file:

 use "http://com/googlecode/efactory/examples/entity"

 @Name{Entity=id}

 Model{   
 	SimpleType String{}
 }
 
is equivalent to: 
 
 use "http://com/googlecode/efactory/examples/entity"

 Model{   
 	SimpleType String{
 		id = "String"
 	} 
 } 
 
It is also possible to define a global name mapping which will be applied for all elements (if there is no custom mapping provided):

 @Name{id}


== Using Efactory ==

=== Java Example ===

Loading a model from an EFactory file  is straightforward. Just load it like any other EMF resource. The loaded resource contains the model that is described in the EFactory file. In our example, we describe an entity model in the efactory file. Thus the loaded resource contains an instance of "Model".

 /* ---- Only in standalone mode --- */
 EFactoryStandaloneSetup.doSetup();
 EntityPackage.eINSTANCE.getClass();
 /* --------------------------------- */
 
 ResourceSet rs = new XtextResourceSet();
 URI uri = URI.createURI("model/Entity.efactory")
 Resource r = rs.getResource(uri, true);
 EObject content = r.getContents().get(0);
 assertTrue(content instanceof Model);

=== MWE Example ===

EFactory models can be read using the normal Xtext MWE Reader. Note, that the EFactory StandaloneSetup must be performed and that the EPackage of the target model must be registered. 

'''Example Workflow:''' 

 <workflow>
 	<property name="modelFile" value="classpath:/model/Sample.efactory"/>
 	<property name="targetDir" value="src-gen"/>
 
 	<bean class="org.eclipse.emf.mwe.utils.StandaloneSetup" platformUri=".."/>
 	
 	<component class="org.eclipse.emf.mwe.utils.DirectoryCleaner" directory="${targetDir}"/>
 	
 	<!-- Register the target EPackage -->
 	<bean class="org.eclipse.emf.mwe.utils.StandaloneSetup">
    		<registerGeneratedEPackage value="com.googlecode.efactory.examples.entity.EntityPackage"/>
   </bean>
   
 	<!-- Setup the EFactory parser -->
 	<component class="org.eclipse.xtext.MweReader" uri="${modelFile}">
 		<register class="com.googlecode.efactory.EFactoryStandaloneSetup"/>
 	</component>
 	
 	<component class="org.eclipse.xpand2.Generator">
 		<metaModel class="org.eclipse.xtend.typesystem.emf.EmfRegistryMetaModel"/>
 		<fileEncoding value="Cp1252"/>
 		<expand value="templates::Template::main FOR model"/>
 		<genPath value="${targetDir}"/>
 	</component>
 </workflow>



== Creating Ecore models with EFactory ==

It is also possible to directly define Ecore models using EFactory. The Ecore model of the entity model from the previous example defined in EFactory looks as follows:

 use "http://www.eclipse.org/emf/2002/Ecore" 

 EPackage entity {
 	nsURI = "http://com/googlecode/efactory/examples/entity"
 	nsPrefix = "entity"
 	eClassifiers += EClass Model {
 	
 		eStructuralFeatures += EReference elements {
 	     	containment = true
 	     	upperBound = -1
 	     	eType = Type
 	     }
 	}  
  
 	eClassifiers += EClass Type {
 		abstract = true
 		
 	    eStructuralFeatures += EAttribute name {         
 			eType = EString
 		}
 	}    
 	
 	eClassifiers += EClass SimpleType {
 	    eSuperTypes += Type
 	}  
 	
 	eClassifiers += EClass Entity {
 		eSuperTypes += Type
 		
 		eStructuralFeatures += EReference extends {           
 			eType = Entity
 			upperBound = -1
 		} 
 		
 		eStructuralFeatures += EReference properties {         
 			eType = Property
 			containment = true     
 	     	upperBound = -1
 		} 
 	}   
 	
 	eClassifiers += EClass Property {
 	
 		eStructuralFeatures += EReference type {         
 			eType = Type
 		}

 		eStructuralFeatures += EAttribute name {         
 			eType = EString
 		}

 		eStructuralFeatures += EAttribute many {         
 			eType = EBoolean
 		}
 	}    
 }   
 
== Current Limitations ==

* No support for defining  unique identifiers based on the imported metamodel. Hence, having a metamodel with two instances of EClass that have the same name is not supported.
* Bi-directional references are only partially supported. This requires changing the EFactory file when an opposite reference is set from another resource.